Richard Phillips Feynman was an American theoretical physicist known for his work in the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics, the theory of quantum electrodynamics, and the physics of the superfluidity of supercooled liquid helium, as well as in particle physics (he proposed the parton model). 
For his contributions to the development of quantum electrodynamics, Feynman, jointly with Julian Schwinger and Sin-Itiro Tomonaga, received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1965.
He developed a widely used pictorial representation scheme for the mathematical expressions governing the behavior of subatomic particles, which later became known as Feynman diagrams. 
During his lifetime, Feynman became one of the best-known scientists in the world. 
In a 1999 poll of 130 leading physicists worldwide by the British journal Physics World he was ranked as one of the ten greatest physicists of all time.
He assisted in the development of the atomic bomb during World War II and became known to a wide public in the 1980s as a member of the Rogers Commission, the panel that investigated the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster.
In addition to his work in theoretical physics, Feynman has been credited with pioneering the field of quantum computing, and introducing the concept of nanotechnology. 
He held the Richard Chace Tolman professorship in theoretical physics at the California Institute of Technology. 
Feynman was a keen popularizer of physics through both books and lectures, notably a 1959 talk on top-down nanotechnology called There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom, and the three-volume publication of his undergraduate lectures, The Feynman Lectures on Physics.
Feynman also became known through his semi-autobiographical books Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman! and What Do You Care What Other People Think? and books written about him, such as Tuva or Bust!.
Richard Phillips Feynman was born on May 11, 1918, in New York City, the son of Lucille, a homemaker, and Melville Arthur Feynman, a sales manager.
His family originated from Russia and Poland; both of his parents were Ashkenazi Jews.
They were not religious, and by his youth Feynman described himself as an "avowed atheist".
Feynman was a late talker, and by his third birthday had yet to utter a single word.
He would retain a Bronx accent as an adult. 
That accent was thick enough to be perceived as an affectation or exaggeration — so much so that his good friends Wolfgang Pauli and Hans Bethe would one day comment that Feynman spoke like a "bum".
The young Feynman was heavily influenced by his father, who encouraged him to ask questions to challenge orthodox thinking, and who was always ready to teach Feynman something new.
From his mother he gained the sense of humor that he had throughout his life. 
As a child, he had a talent for engineering, maintained an experimental laboratory in his home, and delighted in repairing radios. 
When he was in grade school, he created a home burglar alarm system while his parents were out for the day running errands.
When Richard was five years old, his mother gave birth to a younger brother, but this brother died at four weeks of age. 
Four years later, Richard gained a sister, Joan, and the family moved to Far Rockaway, Queens. 
Though separated by nine years, Joan and Richard were close, as they both shared a natural curiosity about the world. 
Their mother thought that women did not have the cranial capacity to comprehend such things.
Despite their mother's disapproval of Joan's desire to study astronomy, Richard encouraged his sister to explore the universe. 
Joan eventually became an astrophysicist specializing in interactions between the Earth and the solar wind.
Upon starting high school, Feynman was quickly promoted into a higher math class and an unspecified school-administered IQ test estimated his IQ at 125—high, but "merely respectable" according to biographer James Gleick. 
In 1933, when he turned 15, he taught himself trigonometry, advanced algebra, infinite series, analytic geometry, and both differential and integral calculus. 
Before entering college, he was experimenting with and deriving mathematical topics such as the half-derivative using his own notation. 
In high school he was developing the mathematical intuition behind his Taylor series of mathematical operators.
His habit of direct characterization sometimes rattled more conventional thinkers; for example, one of his questions, when learning feline anatomy, was "Do you have a map of the cat?" (referring to an anatomical chart).
Feynman attended Far Rockaway High School, a school also attended by fellow laureates Burton Richter and Baruch Samuel Blumberg. 
A member of the Arista Honor Society, in his last year in high school Feynman won the New York University Math Championship; the large difference between his score and those of his closest competitors shocked the judges.
He applied to Columbia University but was not accepted because of their quota for the number of Jews admitted.
Instead, he attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he received a bachelor's degree in 1939 and in the same year was named a Putnam Fellow.
He attained a perfect score on the graduate school entrance exams to Princeton University in mathematics and physics—an unprecedented feat—but did rather poorly on the history and English portions. 
Attendees at Feynman's first seminar included Albert Einstein, Wolfgang Pauli, and John von Neumann. 
He received a Ph.D. from Princeton in 1942; his thesis advisor was John Archibald Wheeler. 
Feynman's thesis applied the principle of stationary action to problems of quantum mechanics, inspired by a desire to quantize the Wheeler–Feynman absorber theory of electrodynamics, laying the groundwork for the "path integral" approach and Feynman diagrams, and was titled "The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics".